          SUNDIALS: SUite of Nonlinear and DIfferential/ALgebraic
                         equation Solvers

The family of solvers referred to as SUNDIALS consists of solvers
CVODE and PVODE (for ODE systems), KINSOL (for nonlinear algebraic
systems), and IDA (for differential-algebraic systems).  In addition,
variants of these which also do sensitivity analysis calculations are
in development.

The various solvers of this family share many subordinate modules.
For this reason, it is organized as a family, with a directory
structure that exploits that sharing.  However, tar-files for
individual solvers can be built and are being distributed, as well as
a tar-file for all solvers released to date, called sundials.tar.
Each individual solver includes documentation on installation, along
with full usage documentation.

The following is a list of the solver packages presently available,
along with the corresponding tar-file name, and the path and name of
the installation documentation file.

CVODE:  A serial solver for stiff and nonstiff ODE systems dy/dt = f(t,y).
        Package file: cvode.tar.
        Installation documentation file: /sundials/cvode/doc/cvreadme

PVODE:  A parallel solver for stiff and nonstiff ODE systems dy/dt = f(t,y).
        Package file: pvode.tar.
        Installation documentation file: /sundials/cvode/doc/pvreadme

KINSOL: A solver for nonlinear algebraic systems F(u) = 0, with serial
        and parallel versions.
        Package file: kinsol.tar.
        Installation documentation file: /sundials/kinsol/doc/kinreadme

IDA:    A solver for differential-algebraic systems F(t,y,y') = 0, with
        serial and parallel versions.
        Package file: ida.tar.
        Installation documentation file: /sundials/ida/doc/idareadme

Note: The packages for CVODE and PVODE each contain one or more
makefiles relevant to the other solver, in order to preserve
uniformity across the suite of solvers.  As a result, typing 'make' at
some points may list options that are not available.

Warning to users who receive more than one of these individual solvers
at different times: The mixing of old and new versions SUNDIALS may fail.  
To avoid such failures, obtain all desired solvers at the same time.


Peter Brown
Keith Grant
Alan Hindmarsh
Steve Lee
Radu Serban
Dan Shumaker
Allan Taylor
Carol Woodward

Nonlinear Solvers and Differential Equations Project
Center for Applied Scientific Computing
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, California, USA

7 February 2002
