                             CVODES 
                   Release 2.1.0, November 2004
                  Alan C. Hindmarsh and Radu Serban
              Center for Applied Scientific Computing, LLNL

CVODES is a solver for stiff and nonstiff ODE systems (initial value problem) 
given in explicit form dy/dt = f(t,y) with sensitivity analysis capabilities 
(both forward and adjoint modes). It is written in ANSI standard C.

CVODES can be used both on serial and parallel (MPI) computers.  The main
difference is in the NVECTOR module of vector kernels.  The desired
version is obtained when compiling the example files by linking the
appropriate library of NVECTOR kernels.  In the parallel version,
communication between processors is done with the MPI (Message Passage
Interface) system.  Throughout this document, we will refer to the
combination of CVODES with the serial implementation of the NVECTOR
module as "the serial version of CVODES".  Similarly, the combination of
CVODES with the parallel implementation of the NVECTOR module is called
"the parallel version of CVODES".

In addition, the two versions are different in the linear system
solvers available.  With the serial version of CVODES, both direct
(dense and band) solvers and a preconditioned Krylov (iterative)
solver are available, but in the parallel version only the Krylov
solver is available.  (An approximate diagonal Jacobian option is
available with both versions.)  For the serial version, there is a
banded preconditioner module called CVBANDPRE available for use with
the Krylov solver, while for the parallel version there is a
preconditioner module called CVBBDPRE which provides a
band-block-diagonal preconditioner.

CVODES is part of a software family called SUNDIALS: SUite of Nonlinear
and DIfferential/ALgebraic equation Solvers.  This suite consists of
CVODE, KINSOL, and IDA, and variants of these.  The directory
structure of the package supplied reflects this family relationship.

The notes below provide the location of documentation, directions for the 
installation of the CVODES package, and relevant references. Following that 
is a brief history of revisions to the package.

A. Documentation
----------------

/sundials/cvodes/doc contains PostScript and PDF files for the 
CVODES User Guide (cvs_guide.ps and cvs_guide.pdf) and the CVODES
Examples (cvs_examples.ps and cvs_examples.pdf) documents.

B. Installation
---------------

For basic installation instructions see /sundials/INSTALL. 
For complete installation instructions see the "CVODES Installation Procedure"
chapter in the CVODES User Guide.

C. References
-------------

[1] A. C. Hindmarsh and R. Serban, "User Documentation for CVODES v2.1.0," 
    LLNL technical report UCRL-MA-xxxxxx, November 2004.

[2] A. C. Hindmarsh and R. Serban, "Example Programs for CVODES v2.1.0," 
    LLNL technical report UCRL-MA-xxxxxx, November 2004.

[3] R. Serban and A. C. Hindmarsh, "CVODES: An ODE Solver with Sensitivity
    Analysis Capabilities," LLNL technical report UCRL-TR-xxxxxx, November 2004.

[4] A. C. Hindmarsh, P. N. Brown, K. E. Grant, S. L. Lee, R. Serban, 
    D. E. Shumaker, and C. S. Woodward, "SUNDIALS, Suite of Nonlinear and 
    Differential/Algebraic Equation Solvers," ACM Trans. Math. Softw., 
    accepted, 2004.

D. Revision History (YYYYMMDD)
------------------------------


